# flood alert system
My first GitHub repository

For the past few years,India has been frequently affected by floodswhich resulted in immense damage to properties and loss of several lives. Hence,we have decided to find a solution to predict floods and alert the people. Floods can be predicted by sensing heavy rainfall, rise of river water and ground water level, so initially the measurement of these parameters is required. For the measurement of river level,groundwater and rainfall,ultrasonic sensor,passive infrared sensor, automated rain gauges are used respectively.Ultrasonic sensors are mainly chosen because of its high frequency, high penetrating power and high accuracy. PIR sensors are mainly chosen because it consumes less energy (0.8W to 1.0W) compared to microwave sensor. They are good for electrical applications used in smaller and compact premises. The outputs of these sensors are fed into Arduino (Arduino UNO board)for processing the acquired data. The data from the Arduino, by means of ESP8266 wi-fi  module is pushed into cloud from where it can be accessed with the help of  Azure. ESP8266 wi-fi chip is chosen because of its low cost and is compatible with Arduino. The above mentioned module is with full TCP/IP capability and has an integrated Microcontroller Unit which gives the possibility to control input /output digital pins through simple programming language. Once the data from arduino is stored in cloud, the SQL database is created. Azure SQL Database is a relational database which uses Microsoft SQL Server Engine and it is a high-performance, reliable, and secure database that can be used to build data-driven applications and websites in the programming language of our choice, without needing to manage infrastructure. Here the database refers to the contact details of people in and around the area. The data from the cloud is retrieved and validated using arduino which has a threshold value set in prior. When the obtained data crosses the threshold value, an alert message is sent to the people around the area. This is accomplished by using GSM module connected with Arduino board. The GSM module is capable of sending SMS by means of the simcard integrated into it. Also a mobile app can be created to monitor and alert about the measured parameters.The objective of this project is to make the people aware of upcoming naturaldisaster (Flood) by an IoT application.
